we all know that bone is very hard
that's a given but there's more to bones
than there they're actually what we call
a composite material made up of two very
different types of element that when
combined makes something very very
unique and very very special the first
one is an organic compound
it's collagen and this gives bone its
flexibility and durability the opposite
end of the scale here is something
called calcium phosphate now this is a
mineral compound and this gives bone its
structure and its strengths combining
the two makes bone a unique material
that it is I'm going to do an experiment
to separate these two key ingredients in
order to understand the critical role
each one plays now there's a skull
that's been in an oven to several days
as this has taken out all the organic
material leaving just the calcium
phosphate and if our bones are made of
just calcium then this is what would
happen
[Music]
there this is absolutely no use at all
you've lost all this wonderful collagen
structure that gives bone flexibility
and you're left with this structure
there's still quite Dennis there's no
integrity to the bone and that's the
issue next we're gonna do the exact
opposite what I want to do is remove all
the mineral component and this time just
leave myself with the organic compound
so this skull should be entirely
collagen it's been soaking away in
formic acid for over a month which
should have removed all of the calcium
phosphate from the bone leaving almost
pure collagen and the result is
something really surprising this time
without the structure and all the
strength you can see you're left with it
twisty squishy flexible skull even the
teeth are flexible this is what
surprised me the most so I had a
skeleton that was entirely made of
collagen you have to scrape me off the
floor
I'd have absolutely no strength or
integrity to my bones a bit like this
thing and that highlights just how
important that is to have a skeleton
with bones made of this composite
material this allows bone to be both
flexible and durable but more than
anything it allows bone to be strong
[Music]